Resident Space Objects (RSOs) are any man-made objects in the earth orbits, including operational satellites, derelict satellites and spacecraft, and space debris from collisions. The number of RSOs increased from 616 to over 23000 in the last half century. Most of these RSOs are concentrated in Low Earth Orbit (LEO) range which is from 100 miles to 1200 miles from the earth’s surface. In 2005, a research paper published stated that the number of 10 cm or larger RSOs is going to increase from collisions between existing RSOs without additional launches.

The increasingly overpopulated orbits put the operational satellites under high risk. One collision between a derelict satellite and an operational communication satellite in 2007 demolished both scattering their debris. On average, the ISS needs to maneuver at least twice each year to avoid collisions. This makes monitoring the position of RSOs extremely important. However, this is not an easy task. Large volumes of RSOs combined with the fact that these RSOs may randomly change their orbit only amplify the difficulty.
With that being said, this is the current situation. Only 30 tracking solutions are currently deployed in the Space Surveillance Network by the DoD to monitor these RSOs. The number of tracking stations is not likely to increase as the construction cost is $1 Million and it takes approx. $500k annually to operate these tracking stations. Given this we propose to leverage the amateur sky-watcher community to contribute to the solution. Amateur sky-watchers collect publically available Two-Line Elements (TLEs) and calculate the relative pointing vectors to where RSOs are relative to their time and location. Then the sky-watchers report their sightings to a community to report the location of spotted RSOs to track them. We are proposing an Android app and camera solution to increase both the accuracy and frequency of these sightings by making the process faster and easier for the sky-watchers. Using a Samsung Galaxy Camera, we propose an app that can direct a sky-watcher to where an RSO is in the sky and then take a long-exposure image to be able to calculate the TLE of the spotted RSO to aid in the tracking of RSOs. Such a system will drop the cost of observations from millions of dollars down to less than a thousand dollars allowing for multiple tracking systems to be deployed and operated with the aid of the amateur sky-watcher community.